I read elizabeth warren's election
promises so you don't have to she is the
woman who runs with the tagline I have a
plan for that her plans are post to the
Internet where anyone can read them over
some of them are very precise and
detailed and actionable and some of them
are more vague statements of principle
all of them have a lot of platitudes in
election rhetoric rolled up with them
but hey it is an election can you blame
her point one she promises to increase
the minimum wage to $15 an hour exactly
the same promise made by Bernie Sanders
I think it's gonna mobilize exactly the
same level of voter support the actual
economic social and political
consequences of this nobody has dealt
with yet nobody has even thought it
through I can say for San Francisco and
Seattle the impacts of a $15 an hour
minimum wage or easy to foresee and are
much more positive than negative
what about Louisiana what about smaller
cities and rural areas throughout the
United States where this is going to be
a huge change in the rate paid per hour
what are the impacts going to be on
farming it could just result in much
more of the labor used in the farm
sector becoming black market illegal
immigrant labor so on and so forth so
there will be both negative and positive
economic impact of this reform and the
other kind of issue haunting both the
Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren
campaigns is this question of how anti
neoliberal they are how eighty China
they are if you increase the hourly rate
for every factory in every farm the
United States to $15 an hour does that
mean that poor people in America will
just buy more and more of their goods
imported from China imported from
Bangladesh imported from countries where
the hourly rate of labor is dramatically
lower so it could exacerbate some of the
economic problems we have while
obviously solving other
I don't see anyone thinking that through
doing the math or making projections of
the knock-on consequences of $15 an hour
minimum wage probably because until
recently nobody really thought it would
be accomplished but having a $15 an hour
minimum wage at a national level at a
federal level is a very very different
thing from just passing it in say
downtown Seattle downtown San Francisco
other very very high paid and very very
high rent areas the United States of
America she has extensive and detailed
plans for labor reform to strengthen the
role of unions in the United States of
America unionized labor I think she put
many years of thought into this and she
probably availed herself of the huge
number of academic experts in the United
States who spent their whole careers
sharpening their knives looking ahead to
the day when they might be able to pass
these kinds of reforms and there's both
good and bad when you get to the details
um I think she would establish a system
that although well-intentioned will be
very susceptible to corruption and by
the way anti-corruption a huge part of a
platform certainly would be an
interesting experiment the United States
the state of organized labor is right
now at such a low ebb that probably any
reform will be an improvement it's very
difficult to imagine her reforms making
the situation worse and you know if it
doesn't work out four years eight years
down the line you can make adjustments
you can figure it as you go but that is
not the kind of policy that's gonna
mobilize support in a simple way
probably industry by industry you're
gonna have experts looking through those
reforms and saying well this won't work
for this reason this will create this
problem you know sector by sector it's a
sort of very complex and difficult to
implement assist a systemic reform that
will be met with a lukewarm response
probably by both employers and employees
all right well intentioned economic
patriotism 0.3 on this list
economic patriotism meaning
protectionism meaning opposition to free
Tate trade with China um the computer
I'm using to record this video was
assembled in China a large percentage of
all the things I own and that I've
bought in the last 20 years were made in
China does economic patriotism mean that
Americans will cease to buy goods
imported from China China is not the
only country with a question mark on it
will Americans stop buying gasoline
exported from Saudi Arabia you know
these are questions with tremendous
far-reaching implications for people's
daily life and for the world economy she
has set down a very incoherent set of
principles that she will link trade she
will link the right of foreign countries
to have trade agreements with United
States or to have trade of the United
States to the status of human rights and
political freedoms in those countries so
obviously China would be the big loser
if you actually took this plan as it
currently exists now and put it into
action
without any further refinement well
there will be winners and losers the
obvious winner would be Japan so are you
actually open to allowing the Japanese
to import unlimited numbers of Japanese
cars States and destroy the American
auto sector just it's only one example
but it's a pretty tremendous example the
other big winner would be India India is
a democracy they meet all these
standards so are you going to allow
Americans to buy all kinds of stuff like
clothing cheaply manufactured in India
India is not manufacturing the computers
that Americans use yet but if you do
this if you take on this this trade
reform within 10 years they're going to
be manufacturing a lot of the
electronics Americans use they'll take
over market share from China there'll be
a transition to people using cellular
phones and all kinds of things made in
India instead of China especially if the
minimum wage is good the $15 an hour
they know it's
so this would be a huge shift globally
from trade with the countries that
currently do not meet the standards for
democracy human rights that she wants to
impose a shift over to economic reliance
on and trade with countries that do meet
those minimum standards uh it's pretty
vague it's pretty incoherent what this
means and nobody is doing the math and
thinking through what will this actually
mean for consumers in the United States
of America Donald Trump has had really a
very mild aunty China trade regime but
even he stopped short of denying
Americans the opportunity to buy a new
Nintendo video game console this
Christmas and so you know some of the
some of the tariffs have been have been
delayed in the representation until
after the Christmas export season is is
done Nintendo they no manufacture the
video game consoles that are export the
United States in Vietnam
rather than China there were factories
right now relocating from China to
Vietnam others are relocating from China
Taiwan Malaysia and elsewhere
well Vietnam is also a communist
dictatorship so it's not really a net
benefit for democracy and human rights
to relocate these industries from China
to Vietnam but that's that's what's been
going on so you know the impacts the
short term and long term of Elizabeth
Warren's principle of so-called economic
patriotism
there will be advantages and
disadvantages I think that this part of
her plan she herself probably is not
really given enough thought to but hey
it's it's an extensive policy document
we're talking about here believe me this
is a this is a cogent summary we're
talking about less than 10% of the text
in this video um another principle she
wants workers employees to elect at
least 40% of board members at big
American corporations mmm at least hmm
hmm I think what she means is at most
can you imagine if the employees at
Disneyland were more than 40% of the
voting shareholders
it would certainly certainly transform
the American economy in many ways if at
Walmart and Disney corporations if the
majority of voting members were not the
investors but were the employees that
would transform calculus was you know if
it's if it's 40 percent rather than 51
percent that's that's a very different
thing interesting idealistic proposal
for a very fundamental economic reform
you'd then have corporations in the in
the position of very directly trying to
bully their workers and explain to them
why they can't pay them higher wages or
why they have to shut down and a certain
factory and fire part of that Factory it
would it would change corporate culture
in America profoundly if 40 percent of
the board members at all corporations
were employees I can think of both
advantages and disadvantages to it
um if I could wave my magic wand and
make it happen
sure I'd do it I might make it 30% right
I don't know if it's if it's above 50%
then you're creating a situation in
which the employees are the owners and
there's unbelievable danger in terms of
corruption so again I mention this
before with her promised reforms would
strengthen unions
mm-hmm to say this is susceptible
corruption as an understatement
it's idealistic to think that the
employee at Starbucks the rank-and-file
employee the guy sitting at the front
cash register is directly making
corporate decisions he's not there's
going to be an unbelievably indirect
undemocratic non transparent and
corruptible relationship between the guy
who works at the front counter at
Starbucks and the people who are
actually in the boardroom dealing with
the corporate owners or attending board
meetings right if you think American
party politics are corruptible there
there are no journalists covering that
stuff there's no transparency there's no
public accountability for how it is that
just a couple of employees end up being
the representatives of the workers and
among the things that can corrupt them
are just the owners of the company
themselves what if the owners
Disneyland take aside those few
employees and make sure they have an
understanding about what's in the
company's best interest yeah
so it's corruptible it's unreliable it's
dangerous it's not transparent it's not
public countable it's never going to be
truly democratic so it creates a lot of
interesting questions
however those questions are worth
answering I mean there are really
profound and interesting questions about
inequality in the workplace gabriele
corporations include hospitals who
should make the decisions at the
hospitals greedy investors you know but
what's the captains of industry mustache
twirling bankers and stockbrokers all
right this is one stereotype the
question of who should really make the
tough decisions in running and managing
a hospital it can't easily be said that
the janitors and the nurses that the
lower paid least powerful people that
the workers that the working-class of
the hospital are going to make the right
decisions obviously of a very complex
situation they're involving a lot of
expert knowledge is expert knowledge
that maybe the surgeons have and the
janitors don't have or the nurses don't
have expert knowledge that may be an
economist has or may be actually a
stockbroker a financier an investment
banker someone that kind of specialized
economic the economic knowledge economic
learning they may have certain knowledge
that the nurses and the janitors and you
know the people who answer the phone the
Secretary's worry announcement that they
don't have
so if 40% of the people at those
corporate meetings they have that
workers perspective yes but they may be
lacking a lot of the expertise that's
really needed to sit on that board and
make those make those tough decisions so
yeah it's gonna raise a lot of really
interesting questions about inequality
within the workplace in a quality of
education and who gets to make the
decision how they're made and on a
cultural level if you really had this
political reform and you stuck with it
as a society you'd learn you
learn how to work together you'd learn
how to run a corporation when 40% of the
people this meetings are are lower-level
employees you have a lot of problems
Warren you still interesting idea
idealistic be nice to see where it goes
okay
canceling up to fifty thousand dollars
in student loan debt for ninety five
percent of people who have it's there
are a few little weasel words in here
but this is very similar to Bernie
Sanders promise to cancel student loan
debt so billions of dollars would be
handed out to people who have already
completed university but who are in debt
to the universities for the cost of
their education ninety five percent of
people a discount of up to fifty
thousand dollars so a slight variation
on the promises made by Bernie Sanders
under that heading
she has a dedicated plan to reduce the
cost of rent in the United States of
America these gets into the problem of
the American Constitution what is the
federal responsibilities and what is the
state responsibilities which he never
touches she never really deals with
constitutional amendments and many of
her plans really probably require a
constitutional amendment but without
amending the Constitution she's gonna
create a five hundred billion dollar
budget creating 1.5 million new jobs and
an independent analysis by an economist
says that this would end up reducing the
cost of rent throughout the United
States as a whole by about ten percent
this is a realistic estimate and also
tragically tells you just how little of
a difference the federal government can
make at least with this five hundred
billion dollar budget to improve the
situation with housing interesting plan
I did the reading I would prefer more of
a principled approach that really asks
and answers the question what is the
role of government in the housing and
real estate sector and gives a coherent
answer we really start from first
principles and probably it's going to
an amendment to the Constitution you do
have a very fundamental conflict of
interest in that the government doesn't
feel that it's in its interest to be
counter-cyclical it's not in the
government's interest to lower the value
of property of houses to be blunt they
don't feel it's in their interest to
lower the value of the cost of rent
instead the government makes more and
more money through procyclical policies
through having this ever upward ever
increasing cost of both buying and
selling residential property and rent
but anyway this is a kind of stopgap
band-aid solution 500 billion dollar
band-aid that would result in a 10%
reduction in the cost of rent by by
these estimates a nationwide program to
provide universal affordable childcare
for all children ages zero to five not
free Japan has free child care zero they
have free preschool whatever free what's
a free nursery school what's what's the
word about something you equate free the
early childhood childcare today but this
isn't free this is just Universal and
affordable so a little bit vague but
again this would be a multi-billion
dollar commitment again not really the
federal government's responsibility as
opposed to state government maybe you
want to take that up with Constitution
what is under the American Constitution
what is the role the federal government
in providing daycare to children ages 0
to 5 hmm did the founding fathers think
that one through making tuition free
here's note the wording tuition free at
every public technical school two-year
college and four-year college so I'm
guessing I'm guessing the difference
between a college and a university
starts to be some guessing there's some
unstated fine print but some kind of
sweeping reformed education that would
make tuition cost free in many
institutions a lot of the time I have my
doubts as to whether or not that's gonna
include Ivy League universities I I
don't know let's go for that but in any
case the
tensions you you at home Gedo your
calculators an estimate how much these
policies would cost if we add up
medicare for all free health care for
everyone this is basically identical to
Bernie Sanders plan from what I can see
but anyway so her health care plan in
one sentence is a promise of Medicare
for all
a 100 billion dollar budget to quote
unquote end the opioid crisis drug
addiction I've seen her detailed
breakdown of the budget in my opinion it
is complete nevertheless um
interesting that she cares interesting
that she's committed to making a
difference and you know I would just
sort of vaguely hope that if she has
that commitment has that interest at
some point this would be refined into
something more effective that the tough
questions would be asked about the
future through a policy in America how
to really solve these these problems but
anyway it's good that she cares you can
definitely be elected president knighted
States just by coming out and saying
that you care and saying that you want
to solve the problem not all of these
plans really deserve to be called plans
in some cases they're just commitments
to you no commitments to solving a
problem one way or another and a
commitment to spending up to 100 billion
dollars doing it yeah her hearts in the
right place I mean again I'm a snob I
look at these things as someone who
really cares about political philosophy
and political science but these policies
don't have to live up to my snobbish
high standards fundamentally she just
has to have a package of policies that
are better than Joe Biden and are better
than Donald Trump and I think if you
guys are following along and making a
list of these policies as we go it's
pretty clear she's already done a better
package of policies than either of those
two capacities a two trillion dollar
investment in American green research
meaning ecology meaning climate change
meaning air pollution and water
pollution Center two trillion dollars
over ten years so that's going to be a
lot less than one
trillion dollars per year right it's
maybe gonna be zero point two trillion
dollars two trillion spread out over ten
years that is a definite contrast to
Bernie Sanders sixteen trillion dollar
plan which I believe is supposed to be
spread out over 15 years in his case
they're all in the trillions but this is
a relatively modest plan to as she says
research manufacturing and exporting in
the so-called green sector again I would
warn that there's there's the potential
for corruption there um still hearts in
the right place there's a general
expectation that everyone on the left is
going to show the depth of their
commitment to coming up with real
ecological solutions to take real local
action so putting the number two
trillion on it doesn't hurt the greatest
weakness of her plan it's probably
foreign policy I've already mentioned
that there's a lot of intentionally
vague garbage that book foreign policy
year I'll probably make a separate video
just talking about that from one angle
or another she is committed to less
military spending she's committed to
ideas like it's time for troops to come
home we've heard this under Barack Obama
before it's not really clear what it is
she's one to commit you there um and
there were commitments to pay for all
this
some of them vague some of them precise
and worked out in great detail to
increase taxes for the rich and that is
one policy proposal I'm absolutely
certain she will stick to so greatest
weaknesses as I read through this mess
of plans in general I think her foreign
policy is still at the stage of being a
sketch on the back of a napkin I don't
think she's lying or being dishonest I
think it's just something she never
really devoted much attention to beyond
very very vague promises of peace
there's just nothing of substance there
there's no question of are you willing
to abandon South Korea so that South
Korea gets conquered by North Korea
probably not are you willing to abandon
the US military base in Okinawa Japan
which is directly linked to South Korea
North Korea by the way probably not you
know are you willing to abandon the
Philippines so that their outer islands
get taken over by China probably not
when you go through the list of policy
priorities even get down to the really
low US military policy priorities like
are you willing to abandon the island of
Cyprus so that it gets taken over by
Turkey probably not so how much can you
really you know reduce the American
military endeavor if you're not willing
to make you know hard decisions hard
sacrifice like that which will include
actually closing down military bases
actually giving up on wars that you
haven't won and that will cost trillions
of dollars well at least at least
billions of dollars to win starting from
your current position in 2019 or 2020
her criminal justice her criminal
justice reform I felt was a joke
well-intentioned thoroughly thought
through a lot of detail there to me
that's that's very easy to criticize and
it's often laughable so without going
detail yeah one would hope again that
she moves I mean there were enough
positive promises here to win the
election they're not positive positive
problems still a lot of good in the
world but sure long story short the
criminal justice reform is weak
the anti-corruption agenda which she
places a lot of emphasis on in her
campaign I found shockingly weak I don't
know why that is in terms of her
education her background and so on and
the emphasis she gives to this I think
she very correctly saw that she could
distinguish yourself from Bernie Sanders
by putting a lot of emphasis on the
anti-corruption agenda the actual plan
as it's set down right now is weak it's
it's it's poor but still hurts in the
right place and I mean what can I tell
you it's better than the anti-corruption
promises that were made by
George W Bush before he was elected you
guys remember that george w bush had an
anti-corruption agenda he had electoral
reform agenda ha ha now the whole lot
happened with that so yeah but still
it's it's worrying and you know maybe in
the months ahead she'll come out with I
know something a little bit more
convincing in terms of getting tough on
crime shall we say yeah both crime in
terms of corruption and crime in terms
of conventional criminal justice reform
I would note because it's an issue
that's been in the mainstream news a lot
lately her position on gun ownership gun
rights gun violence incredibly weak just
a huge hole in her policy in my face you
can read her plan shockingly weak poorly
thought through and again what she's
really fundamentally doing is avoiding
committing to anything that would entail
an amendment to the Constitution and on
some of these issues
gun violence electoral reform corruption
the role of corporate lobbyists in
government the role of corporate
lobbyists in the military there are many
many issues where fundamentally what
she's talking about absolutely would
require a constitutional amendment maybe
that can be my positive suggestion in
closing this video is that Elizabeth
Warren takes the mess of Policy
Priorities that she now has and she
refines them
she distills them she extracts from them
a short list of exactly what the
amendments to the Constitution are that
she would propose because if you want to
get money out of politics if you want to
reform the electoral system if you want
to end corruption if you want to
accomplish all these things if you want
to fundamentally change the way
employees relate to their employers if
you want to fundamentally change the
relationship between tenant and landlord
you want to change the way Americans buy
homes and go into debt there are a lot
of fundamental changes you say you want
to make to your plus you want to raise
the minimum wage $15 an hour plus you
want to destroy trade between the United
States and China in the name of human
rights I'm all for it I'm all for it but
dealing with the
consequences do you have a plan for that
it would entail quite a few amendments
to the American Constitution and hey
that's what amendments are for